# Set up MySQL database server

MySQL is an open-source relational database management system.

## 1 Install

### 1.1 If using macOS with MacPorts

Execute on the command line:

```console
sudo port install mysql8-server
```

Select `mysql8` as your preferred version of MySQL with:

```console
sudo port select mysql mysql8
```

### 1.2 If using macOS with Homebrew

Execute on the command line:

```console
brew install mysql
```

### 1.2 If using Ubuntu

Execute on the command line:

```console
sudo apt install mysql-server
```

## 2 Start

Since MySQL is an essential part of our web apps, so we want it always running
and started automatically after a reboot.

### 2.1 If using macOS with MacPorts

First initialize the server by executing on the command line:

```console
sudo /opt/local/lib/mysql8/bin/mysqld --initialize --user=_mysql
```

Take note of the `root` password generated by the command as you will need it in
the next step.

Now you can start the server with:

```console
sudo port load mysql8-server
```

This will also start the server automatically after a reboot.

To stop the server and prevent it from running after a reboot, execute:

```console
sudo port unload mysql8-server
```

### 2.2 If using macOS with Homebrew

Execute on the command line:

```console
brew services start mysql
```

This will also start the server automatically after a reboot.

To stop the server and prevent it from running after a reboot, execute:

```console
brew services stop mysql
```

### 2.3 If using Ubuntu

By default, MySQL server will be started and enabled to automatically
start after reboot on Ubuntu. If you want to manually start/stop/enable/disable
it, you can use following commands:

```console
sudo service mysql restart
sudo service mysql start
sudo service mysql stop
sudo service mysql status
sudo systemctl is-enabled mysql
sudo systemctl enable mysql
sudo systemctl disable mysql
```

## 3 Secure

Improve the security of the installation by executing the following on the
command line:

```console
mysql_secure_installation
```

Follow the instructions to configure `root` as password for the `root` user. If
MySQL was installed using MacPorts, enter the password generated at the
initialization.

Additionally, follow the instructions to:

- skip setting up VALIDATE PASSWORD component
- remove anonymous users and test databases
- disallow the remote login for `root`

That will be sufficient for local development needs.

### 3.1 Enable and configure `root` user (Ubuntu only)

On Ubuntu by default the `root` user is set up in a way that you can't log in
with credentials. In order to fix this, enter the MySQL shell as sudo:

```console
sudo mysql
```

Then inside the MySQL command line execute the following commands:

```mysql
ALTER USER 'root'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED WITH mysql_native_password BY 'root';
FLUSH PRIVILEGES;
```

**Note:** You can change `root` with another password that you want to use.

At last, you need to restart the MySQL service:

```console
sudo service mysql restart
```

After that, you will be able to login with:

```console
mysql -u root -p
```

## 4 Configure

### 4.1 If using macOS with MacPorts

Edit file `/opt/local/etc/mysql8/my.cnf`, comment out the line including the
default MacPorts settings and add the following configuration:

```ini
[mysqld]
basedir="/opt/local"
bind-address=127.0.0.1
binlog_expire_logs_seconds=86400
```

Now reload the server with:

```console
sudo port reload mysql8-server
```

### 4.2 If using macOS with Homebrew

Edit file `/usr/local/etc/my.cnf` and add the following line in the `[mysqld]`
section:

```ini
binlog_expire_logs_seconds=86400
```

Now reload the server by executing on the command line:

```console
sudo port reload mysql8-server
```

## 4 Create admin user

To avoid MySQL upgrade borking the database access by resetting the password
authentication method, we will create a new user `admin` with password `admin`
which will be used to access the server.

First, log into the server by executing the following on the command line:

```console
mysql -uroot -p
```

Enter the password `root` when asked. If you set up everything correctly, you
should arrive at the MySQL command-line client. Execute on the `mysql>` command
line:

```console
CREATE USER 'admin'@'localhost' IDENTIFIED WITH mysql_native_password BY 'admin';
GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON *.* TO 'admin'@'localhost';
FLUSH PRIVILEGES;
```

Now you can exit the MySQL command-line client by typing `exit`.

## 5 Test

Test that you can use your newly created `admin` user to access the command line
by executing:

```console
mysql -uadmin -p
```

Enter the password `admin` when asked. You should again arrive at the MySQL
command-line client:

```text
Welcome to the MySQL monitor.  Commands end with ; or \g.
Your MySQL connection id is 49

Copyright (c) 2000, 2020, Oracle and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.

Oracle is a registered trademark of Oracle Corporation and/or its
affiliates. Other names may be trademarks of their respective
owners.

Type 'help;' or '\h' for help. Type '\c' to clear the current input statement.

mysql>
```

## 6 Install a GUI client

You will probably also want a graphical UI client to work with the database
server.  For macOS, [TablePlus](https://tableplus.com/) is a good choice,
offering unlimited free trial with reasonable limitations for light use. For
Ubuntu, you can use [DBeaver Community](https://dbeaver.io/) which is free and
multi-platform tool with support for all popular databases and offers a lot of
features.

Install your preferred GUI client and configure the connection to the server
with the `admin` user. If the connection works, you've finished installing and
configuring your MySQL server.
